The Lay of Horned Sewfrid

First Adventure:
How Sewfrid became horned

Herein you find a beautiful lay about horned Sewfrid.
It is in the Hildebrand metre, whose like I have never heard,
and if you read it in a stiff monotone, I will be much agrieved.

There sat in the lowlands a well-renowned king,
with great power and might. Sigmunde was he named.
He had, with his wife, a son named Sewfrid,
of whom you will hear here in this lay.

The boy was so willful, as well as big and strong,
that his father and mother were greatly vexed.
He never wanted to be obedient, to be subordinate, to any man.
Stubborn and courageous he remained, so that he simply ignored others.

Then the king's council spoke: "Let him set out on his own,
and not remain here at court. That is the best advice.
And let him test himself, so that he will be tamed indeed.
Then he will be a very bold hero and live many years."

Thus he departed from them, the bold young man.
He arrived at a village that lay at the edge of a forest.
Then he came to a smith, whom he wished to serve well.
He struck upon the iron as one of the servants.

But he struck the iron in twain, struck the anvil into the earth.
When he was punished for this, he refused admonishment.
He struck the apprentice and master, driving them back and forth.
And the master contemplated how misfortunate he had become.

There was a great dragon, who lay all day by a linden tree.
The master sent Sewfrid there, commanding him to go.
A charcoal burner sat in the forest, beside which he shall wait.
He would give him charcoal by the same linden tree.

Thereby, the smith believed, the wyrm would dispatch him
when he came to the linden tree. But he overcame the wyrm
and quickly slew him—the brave, young man.
Then he thought of the charcoal burner and continued on his way.

He entered a wilderness with as many dragons,
lindwyrms, toads, and adders as he had ever seen
in his day, lying between mountains in a valley.
Then he grasped the nearby trees and tore them out completely.

He cast them upon the wyrms so that none might escape.
They all had to remain, many though they were.
Then he ran to the charcoal burner where he found fire,
ignited the wood, and set the wyrms to burn.

The horn of the wyrms softened, and a rivulet flowed from it.
This greatly amazed Sewfrid, so he probed it with a finger.
When his finger cooled down, it was horn-skinned.
With the same stream, he smeared his body,

so that he became completely horn-skinned, except between the shoulders.
And at that spot he would suffer his death,
as you have surely heard before, in other poems.
He proceeded to Gybich's court, where he exhibited much bravery.

He served the king willingly, for his daughter's sake
and so that King Gybich would give her to him as wife.
This he did for eight full years. Now hear what happened there,
what wonders began before she was separated from him.

Now you will want to hear how the Nybling hoard,
so opulent, was found by no other hero.
Sewfrid the bold found it near a stone wall,
where a dwarf named Nybling had hidden it.

When the dwarf Nybling was stricken by death in a mountain,
he left three very young sons, to whom the treasure was also precious.
They sat in the mountain, guarding Nybling's hoard.
On account of the hoard, the Huns brought miserable deaths

to many a brave hero, slain
in that hard battle, as you yet hear told.
No one came away from there, as you know,
except for Dieterich von Bern and master Hiltebrandt.

Second Adventure:
How Krimhiltwas kidnapped by a dragon.

A city named Worms lay upon the Rhein.
Therein there was set a king named Gybich.
He had, with his wife, three high-born sons
and a daughter, on account of whom many brave heroes were lost.

The king's youths were three, as I said,
And their sister was beautiful. One day at midday,
she stood in her window. Then a wild dragon came
flying through the air and took the beautiful maid.

The castle was lit up, as if it were aflame.
The monster flew there with the maid in hand.
He swung in the air, high, among the clouds.
Then one could see father &amp; mother, standing despondent.

He bore her into the mountains upon a stone so long
that it cast a shadow a quarter mile over the mountains.
On account of her beauty, the maid was very dear to the dragon.
She had no need for food or drink because of him.

He kept her upon the stone until the fourth year.
She saw no one during this time, I believe.
She was also alone for long stretches of time, twelve weeks or more.
Her misery was so great that she cried daily.

The dragon lay his head in the lap of the maiden.
His strength was so immeasurably great,
that when he let out his breath or drew it in,
the stone trembled beneath the dragon.

One Easter Sunday, the dragon became a man.
Then the maiden spoke plainly: "Great evil you have done
to my noble father and to my mother,
so that they suffer misery and distress at my loss.

"Woe is me, dearest lord. Some days it is as if
I never saw my father and mother, yet worse,
nor my beloved brothers. I would like to be reunited.
I would be eternally thankful, if I could but see them again.

"If you would permit me to travel back home,
I would pledge my own head that I would return to this stone.
Permit me, noble lord, by highest God,
and I will ever after willingly perform your command."

The monster replied thus to the maid:
"Your father and your mother shall never see you again.
Nor shall you ever gaze upon any other creature.
With body and also with soul, you must go to Hell.

"Beautiful damsel, you may not be ashamed of me.
I will not yet take your body or your life from you.
But five years from today, I will become a man,
thus to take your maidenhood. A virgin shall you be no more.

"So you must wait for me—five years and a day.
Then you will become a woman. If I want to send it,
then your body and soul must go to Hell in the ground.
You are a king's daughter, and to him shall I also make this known.

"What I now tell you here is certain:
One day in Hell, has the length of a whole year.
You must remain there within until Judgment Day.
May God have mercy on you, if it be his will."

The maid prayed: "I have heard it told, mighty Jesus Christ,
that you have power over everything that is
in heaven and on earth and over all things.
A word that went from your mouth destroyed Hell.

"O chaste virgin Mary, empress of heaven,
I, a poor maiden, entrust myself to your grace,
The books say I, a very virtuous, chaste woman, am yours.
Help me from this stone, as I well trust you will.

"If my brothers knew me to be on this hollow stone,
and if it were possible, they would bring me home again,
to my beloved father. Help me out of my plight.
Weep crimson blood all day."

Third Adventure:
How Sewfrid found the dwarf Eugel

The king sent out across the whole land to learn
whether anyone might know anything concerning his beautiful daughter.
That was the greatest sorrow in the whole wide world
until a mighty warrior loosed her from that stone.

There was at that time a bold youth,
who was called Sewfrid: the son of a wealthy king,
who grew so mighty that he caught a lioness
and then, to her disgrace, hung her high in a tree.

And when that same Sewfrid grew into a man,
he wanted to hunt one morning, and to ride to the forest
with hawk and hound. The bold warrior had soon
despoiled the mighty beasts there in the woods.

Then one of his tracker hounds ran ahead of him into the forest.
Quickly Sewfrid rode after him, that very bold man,
along that strange trail where the dragon was crawling
with the noble maiden. The hound followed the trail.

Sewfrid pursued him for four days.
Without food or drink, without rest,
until on the fourth morning, climbing over the mountain so high,
Sewfrid did not cease from hurrying after him.

Now he was lost in a dark forest.
It seemed to him that every path &amp; ford led quickly astray.
He cried out: "O mighty Christ, where have I lost myself?"
He did not yet know the joy of the beautiful maid.

Sewfrid had fought very nobly that year,
and five thousand dwarves served him contentedly.
They gave the worthy hero their wealth willingly.
He had slain a wyrm, before whom there was no defense.

Then Sewfrid came before the dragon stone.
To that day, he had never seen the stone's like.
Both horse and man were wearied by the journey,
so the bold warrior dismounted there at the stone.

Then Sewfrid the hero beheld the dragon.
You will want to hear how the warrior spoke:
"O mighty God of heaven, what has borne me here?
The devil has cheated me. Who would speak of wonders?"

How quickly it began to darken then around Sewfrid.
How quickly he took all his tracker hounds to his arms.
"If God in heaven would allow it," said the warrior lord,
"once out of this dark forest, I would never again return."

He went to his horse, desiring to ride out.
Then he saw chasing him, through the dark forest,
a dwarf named Euglein, his horse black as coal.
He wore a silken garment, leafed with gold.

On his body, he wore sable trim
and splendid jewelry, I have heard.
There was never a king so rich, which greatly pleased him.
He certainly bore himself with great honor.

He wore upon his head a crown of rich quality,
whose like was never seen upon the earth.
In his crown lay a great many gemstones
of peerless beauty.

Then the dwarf Euglein spoke as he gazed upon the hero.
You will enjoy hearing how he spoke to him there.
He greeted him courteously, that exceptional man:
"Now tell me, lord, what brings you into the woods?"

"Thank you, God," said Sewfrid, "and you, tiny man,
if I may enjoy your courtesy and loyalty here.
If you know me, then what is my father called?
I ask that you name him and also my mother."

Now, the hero Sewfrid had lived his year
such that he was not a hair like his father or mother.
He was sent far into a dark wood,
where he went to a master smith until he became a man.

He grew twenty-four sizes and as strong as a man.
The dwarf addressed him: "If you want to know,
your mother was called Siglinge and was born of nobility.
Your father, King Sigmunde. From him are you come.

"You should turn from here, Sewfrid, you worthy man.
And if you don't do it soon, your life you must lose.
Upon a nearby stone is sat a dragon,
and if he gets you near there, your life you have lost.

"There lives upon this stone the most beautiful of maids.
That you surely know, as well as what is told to you here.
She is from Christian people, a king's daughter.
Without God's mercy, she will never be redeemed.

"Her father is called Gybich and sits by the Rhein.
Krimhilt is the princess named, and she is his daughter."
Then the hero Sewfrid said, "She is well known to me.
We were introduced to one another in her father's country."

When Sewfrid the bold heard the tale in full,
he stuck his sword in the earth and approached the stone.
Upon it, the exceptional man swore three oaths
that he would not depart without the maiden.

Then the dwarf Eugel said, "Sewfrid, you brave man,
you would take on one thing or another here,
and swore the three oaths that you would have the maiden.
But give me leave soon, from this dark wood.

"Indeed, unless you had defeated a half part of the earth
and seventy-two nations happily served you,
so that Christians and heathens were subject to you,
you would do well to leave the beauty high upon that stone."

Then Sewfrid spoke nimbly: "No, tiny man.
Your courtesy and loyalty shall suffice,
and you will help me win the comely damsel here,
or else I shall strike your head off, along with your crown."

Eugel spoke: "Then I shall lose my life here, on account of the comely maid,
so that I repay my loyalty and the promise on my life.
God have mercy, for all things are possible.
Otherwise, no one can help you. I tell you that in truth."

Then the hero Sewfrid became very grim of mood.
He grabbed the dwarf by his hair, the good, proud warrior,
and struck him mightily on a stone wall
so that his regal crown fell to pieces in the sand.

He spoke: "Bestill your wrath, virtuous man.
I want to advise you, noble Sewfrid, of all that I can
and will show you to the trail with complete loyalty.
The devil knows well, indeed, what you did before."

He spoke: "Here is sat, a giant named Kuperan,
to whom the entire realm of a thousand giants is subject.
The same has the key by which the stone may rise."
"Show it to me," demanded Sewfrid, "the way to the maiden.

"You shall show it to me here. In that way, you may keep your life."
Then spoke the noble dwarf: "Shortly, you must fight for the woman,
more severely than I have seen any man."
"I am pleased," said Sewfrid, "that I may fight."

Fourth Adventure:
How Sewfrid withstood the giant Kuperan

Then he showed Sewfrid where the giant's abode lay:
ahead, by the mountain and by the stone wall.
Then Sewfrid called into the giant's home
and courteously asked the giant to come out.

Then the monster leapt out before the stone wall,
with a steel staff that he bore in his hand.
"What have you brought forth, young knaveling?
Very soon in this forest, you shall meet your end.

"I give you my word on this, you have lost your life."
Then the hero Sewfrid spoke, "God provides help.
He shall give me his strength and his might
so that you shall be forced to give me the noble maiden.

"Therefore, we must call for your death all the more,
because you held the maiden captive in such sorrow,
in this stone hole, with such great misery,
for more than four whole years, lying in great sorrow."

Then the unfaithful one became so grim of mood
that, envious of the hero, he struck the staff.
From the whole length of the staff a wonder then emanated,
so that it illuminated more than half of the trees of the forest.

Then the giant Kuperan hurled swings without number,
slamming the staff a fathom deep in the earth.
He swung at Sewfrid quickly, with a blow so mighty
that Sewfrid heroically leapt back five fathoms.

And five fathoms again, that most worthy man leapt towards him
when the giant stooped down and took the staff from the earth.
Sewfrid struck him with many wounds so that blood ran forth.
Never upon the earth were such deep wounds struck.

Up sprang the monster, and he ran at Sewfrid
with his steel staff, crying, "Little man,
you have already forfeited your life."
Then Sewfrid said to him, "May it be God's will that you tell a lie."

And when the faithless one felt the wounds,
he let the staff fall and fled to the stone wall.
There Sewfrid brought him near to the agony of death.
He thought of the maid, who was trapped.

The giant bound his wounds and steeled himself quickly
with a good byrnie of considerable value,
made from excellent clear gold imbued with dragon blood.
Except Emperor Ortnit's byrnie, no byrnie was ever so good.

The giant bound to his side a very good sword,
tailored to his height &amp; strength. It was made for his hand
so that after he struck, one might yield to him a whole nation,
for if he invades a land in battle, he lets no man there continue to live.

He set upon his head a helm of hard steel
that shone as the sun on the flowing sea.
He took in his hand a shield like a barn door
and thick as a shoe—that I believe truly.

Then the monster leapt forth from the stone wall.
Another steel staff he bore in his hand.
It cut on four edges, as no dagger ever could,
and also sounded as bright as a bell in a tower.

Then the monster spoke: "Reveal it, little man,
that the devil sent you here. What have I done to you
that you would wish to murder me in my own house?"
"You lie," said Sewfrid "I called you out to me."

Then the strong giant spoke: "You may curse me,
but I will repay you well, because you have sought me.
And if you had avoided this, it would have been better.
Now you must learn to hang for your reckless mischief."

Sewfrid spoke: "God shall deny you that, you virtueless villain.
It is certainly not by the hangman's will that I have come here.
Through you I would win the maid from the stone.
Otherwise, I tell you truly, your life will be brief."

Then the monster spoke: "I tell you now
that I will never help you win this maid.
I will prevent you—you don't know my courage—
never again will I allow you to covet a good woman.

"May it be so for you, today and ever after."
Then Sewfrid said in response, "I was ready early today."
Then they ran at one another, the two brave men,
with heavy blows there in the dark wood.

Between the strong men such strife occurred
that one saw wild fire there on the helms.
How grand indeed was the shield that the giant bore.
Sewfrid swifty struck it to pieces,

for the tall giant's defense was wanting.
He cut from the body his good steel garb,
then stood with blood running—the giant Kuperan—
with sixteen deep wounds that he took from Sewfrid.

The giant Kuperan bewailed his affliction loudly:
"Noble warrior lord, you should leave me in peace.
You fight with all your might and out of great manliness.
You are in all honor, a warrior undaunted.

"You stand here all alone and are a little man,
here to guage yourself against me. I cannot defeat you.
If you would let me live, then I will give to you
my byrnie, my sword, and myself. These shall you have from me."

"That would I gladly do," said Sewfrid, the worthy man,
"if you will win for me the winsome maid from the stone.
Thus I swear here troth to you." "You shall be without doubt
that I shall win for you the beautiful damsel from the stone."

Then together they both swore oaths, the foreign guests:
Sewfrid the warrior lord, who held fast,
and the disloyal one, who was without victory over Sewfrid.
Of this, at his end, he enjoyed very little.

Fifth Adventure:
How the giant twice betrayed Sewfrid

Then the strong giant spoke further to the worthy knight:
"God knows it, so trust, fellow, that these wounds do me injury."
Then Sewfrid ripped from his body his fine silken gown,
and bound the disloyal one's wounds.

Then the faithless one spoke: "Know truly my companion:
there lies the end of the stone. Where might the door be?
That we shall see, virtuous man.
What we did, one to the other, that is already done."

They went with one another to a dam by the water.
How quickly the faithless one took his sword in hand,
and when the hero Sewfrid walked before him in the forest,
the faithless one swiftly sprang upon him.

He gave to the hero Sewfrid a clumsy blow
so that the noble knight lay under his shield,
motionless, as if he were dead.
From nose and from mouth, he streamed blood so red.

Now, when the hero Sewfrid lay under his bright shield,
the dwarf Eugel was right there at hand.
He took a cloak of mist and cast it over the man.
How fiendish the giant was towards him, yet he could not find him.

The giant ran to the trees and searched for the worthy man.
"Has the devil driven you off, or has God done it
and made a sign with you? At first you were standing here
laid out, stretched, and now I have lost you."

The speech brought laughter to the delightful little dwarf.
He sat Sewfrid up and set him on the ground.
There he sat a good while, the exceptional man,
until the bold warrior recovered himself a bit.

And when the hero Sewfrid came back to himself,
then he saw sitting beside him the delightful little dwarf.
"God bless you," said Sewfrid, "you wonderful little man.
I cannot say otherwise: You have done well by me."

Then the dwarf Eugel said: "You must admit that
if I had not helped you, yet worse would befall you.
Now follow my instruction, and consider well the maid.
Flee in your cloak to conceal yourself from the giant."

Then the hero Sewfrid said: "That shall not be.
If I had a thousand lives, I know in my faithfulness,
I would wager them all to do well by the maid.
I would try again and again, however well it goes for me."

So he heroicly cast the cloak away.
The sword held in both hands hewed for him eight deep wounds
in the strange man. Loudly he called out to the maid.
The mighty giant Kuperan was quickly stricken to death.

Kuperan spoke: "You fought for your life with complete manliness.
Now I see you all alone, undaunted warrior.
Yet, if you strike me to death, exceptional man,
there will be no one on earth who could lead you to the maiden."

Therewith, the hero Sewfrid had many thoughts
of how his whole life compelled him towards the maid.
He had to let the disloyal man live.
He said: "Lead me along your path. You must walk before me,

"and show me quickly to the maid.
Otherwise, I will strike you on your head and shall destroy the world."
Then the disloyal one, out of genuine need,
had to do what the hero Sewfrid, the young knight, commanded him.

They went together, up to the dragonstone.
As soon as the disloyal one took the key in hand,
the stone was opened, and it was open beneath.
Eight fathoms under the earth, the door had been hidden.

Since the stone had yielded and was opened below,
as soon as the hero Sewfrid reached for the key,
he broke it violently from the lock.
He said: "Lead me along your path. You must walk before me."

They both became tired before they came onto the stone.
And when the hero Sewfrid beheld the chaste maid,
she began to weep loudly, as yet we hear told.
She said, "I have seen you, knight, in my father's house."

The maiden spoke thus: "Be welcome, Sewfrid, my lord.
How are my mother and father at Worms on the Rhine,
and my beloved brothers, the three praiseworthy kings?
Tell me, on your honor. Let me know."

Then the hero Sewfrid spoke: "Silence! Let your weeping cease.
You shall come away from here with me, beautiful chaste maiden.
I will help you presently from this great plight,
or I shall surely die here for it."

"May God reward you, Sewfrid, you excellent knight.
I fear, however, you might not be able to withstand the dragon.
It is the cruelest devil that I have ever seen,
and if you gaze upon him, you must tell the truth."

Then the hero Sewfrid spoke: "He cannot be so dreadful.
I do not wish to have wasted my great deeds.
I have fought so severely with the strange man,
and if he were the devil, yet would I overcome him."

"May God reward you, Sewfrid. You have done great deeds,
willingly suffer on account of manliness, and endure pains on my account.
God help me return to the land that I know as home.
For that, I give you my devotion. There are no others before you."

Then the mighty giant Kuperan strode towards the stone.
He said, "Here is hidden a very well-wrought sword.
With it, a noble knight may win victory over the dragon.
Otherwise, there is no steel on earth that can defeat him."

As he said of the sword, it was there in truth.
And when he failed to guard himself before the disloyal man,
the mighty giant struck and wounded the noble knight,
so that he could barely stand on one leg upon the dragonstone.

Then he grabbed the giant and wrestled with him mightily
so that the dragonstone trembled. The maiden's fear was great.
She wept and wrung her hands. The delicate chaste maiden
spoke: "O God in heaven, stand beside the right man today.

"And should you, for my sake, lose your life, Sewfrid,
then I would bear miserable grief in my heart,
and I would expire from this great plight
on this high stone so that I lie dead.

"Therefore, hero Sewfrid, guard your life
and think of your labors and of me, a poor woman."
Then the hero Sewfrid spoke: "Beautiful maid, most lovely,
I trust myself to endure. Worry for me no more."

The warriors wrestled with one another. The beautiful woman watched.
Then the disloyal one had to lose his life.
Sewfrid reached into the strange man's wounds
and ripped them apart so that he could stand no longer.

The giant began to bend before Sewfrid on that plain:
"You should let me live, virtuous man.
I ask that in seriousness, undaunted knight.
I have been thrice unfaithful. By God, that will always be regretted."

Then the hero Sewfrid spoke: "Your speech is now worthless.
I have seen the high-born maid with my own eyes."
He took him by the arms, and cast him from the stone.
The giant cracked into a hundred pieces, at which the maiden laughed.

Sixth Adventure:
How the wyrm was driven off and Nibelung's sons carried the hoard from the mountain

Just then, the hero Sewfrid won the high stone.
He walked in courtly manner before the beautiful maid.
"O maid beautiful above all women, you should cease your weeping.
I am now saved, on account of you, blessed maid.

"I will help you out of this great plight,
or else I must certainly lie dead before you here."
"God reward you, Sewfrid, undaunted knight.
I feared for my innocence. Great woe approaches us."

The hero Sewfrid spoke: "Then a great deed approaches us!
It is dear to me, sorrow from my whole heart.
Yet I shall survive until the fourth day,
without food or water. Rest alone never nourishes.

This frightened the little ones, Eugel the dwarf
and the lovely maiden. Sewfrid's sullenness frightened them.
The dwarf said to Sewfrid: "I will bring the best food
here, on the cavernous stone, as a reward for you, Sewfrid.

"I will give you food and drink enough for fourteen days."
Forth from the cavernous mountain, he bore the food there.
That good dwarf served, at table, much fine food.
In addition, Sewfrid took the maiden into his protection.

Before they could take a bite, they heard a sound,
as if the high mountains all fell into a vale.
This greatly frightened the beautiful maiden.
She said: "Dearest lord, now it shall be your end.

All the world stands in our hands
if we two are lost. Know that, bold warrior."
Then the hero Sewfrid spoke: "Who will take life from us
that God has given us on earth, on account of his benevolence?"

Sewfrid took his silk shirt and wiped his sweat off.
The lovely maiden was hot with fears.
Sewfrid said: "You should not mourn while I am still beside you."
The dwarf, who had served them at table, fled away.

While the couple were engaged in their conversation,
from three miles away the dragon fared.
One could see it by the fire that came from him.
Three full spear-lengths ahead of him, the flames flared.

He did an accursed thing in a devilish manner,
because at all times the devil was beside him
in the form of a fire-dragon. Indeed, it was painless to him.
His soul, reaon, and senses must all have been willing.

He had a human mind, yet it was now
one day and five years since he had been human:
a beautiful youth, often pursued.
That was the result of love: A woman had cursed him.

But on account of Krimhilt's beauty, the dragon became human once more,
when the five years had come and gone since he had taken her.
He had wanted to have her ever since he became a dragon.
In this way, she would become his. Otherwise it would never be.

And now, Sewfrid wanted to take from him the maiden,
he whom he had long despised. And he wanted to bring her to Worms.
For that reason, he was very wrathful. Faring forth to the stone,
he would burn with heat those who were upon the stone.

Now the maiden became very distressed, and Sewfrid gave this advice:
They would conceal themselves so that  he would not
pluck them both up in flight. In a hole that was there,
under the dragonstone, they went into the mountain

until the dragon fed, and they hid away from his heat.
Then he came with fire, in devilish fashion.
He came driving at the stone, so that the stone shook.
Never, since the world has stood, was the stone so shaken.

Now, Sewfrid had brought with him the dragon's sword,
of which Kuperan had told him when he brought him to death—
high on the dragonstone, when he bent himself
on the end of the stone, reaching for the sword.

Just then, Sewfrid sprang up out of the hole with this sword.
With great wrathful swings, he thrust at the wyrm.
The wyrm ripped the shield off of Sewfrid with his claws
so that great fear caused hot sweat to run off him.

The stone gave off a heat all over, like an ember.
Like a glowing iron taken from a forge,
the dreadful wyrm made the heat so great,
and always the hellish fire shot at Sewfrid.

Then, upon the stone and on the cavernous mountain,
there was a forceful brawl, such that the wild dwarves
all ran away towards the forest and each had the fear
that the mountain would collapse and that he had lost his life.

Now, Nybling's two sons were there in the mountain.
They were Eugel's brothers, who had guarded fast
their father Nybling's treasure. Now when the mountain did quake,
the two dwarf-kings ran there to carry the treasure out.

And they met him in a cavern, by a stone wall,
under the dragonstone. Sewfrid found them there,
as you will later hear. Only Eugel the dwarf
did not know of their flight, by which the mountain was made empty.

Along with the treasure which they had hidden,
they also kept the wyrm's part with care.
They had all feared he would vanquish Sewfrid
and that the wyrm would kill every dwarf thereafter.

He would have lost the maiden, because of the dwarves,
when the dragon was on the stone and at the stone's door.
If he wanted to cool himself, he lay in the doorway
when the maiden slept. He was never away from her for long.

Whenever he took food at winter time,
he sat under the stone, fifty fathoms wide.
Thus he lay before the hole and kept her from the cold.
Now we must resume the tale so that you can hear the rest:

The stone became enflamed so that the hero Sewfrid had to
flee the great heat that he suffered from the dragon,
which he spit out from himself. The flames were blue and red,
from which Sewfrid had to protect himself, which greatly oppressed him.

The maiden and Sewfrid fled beneath the mountain
until the dragon's heat dissipated a little.
He walked over and came upon the treasure.
He believed that the dragon had piled it in that place.

That treasure was cursed. Then the maiden spoke:
"Noblest lord Sewfrid, our first great trial approaches us.
He flies with sixty companions, which are all poisonous
and remain upon the stone. Yet your strength is exceeding."

"Now, I have always heard," said high-born Sewfrid,
"that whoever relies on God will never be lost.
If we should both die, it would be lamented by God,
so I will protect you, exceptional maid."

Seventh Adventure:
How Sewfrid slew the dragon and dumped the hoard into the Rhine

Then the hero Sewfrid became wrathful and ominous.
He grasped his sword and climbed up to the stone.
Then the dragons who pursued him scattered
and flew back where they had come from.

The old dragon alone stayed and made trouble for Sewfrid.
Out from his throat came flames, blue and red.
They hit Sewfrid often and stoutly so that he lay on the ground.
In all his days, he never came into such great hardship.

The devilish dragon fought with his tail
and often bound the hero Sewfrid up,
intending to throw him off of the high stone.
Sewfrid sprang from the loop so that he was not trapped within it.

Sewfrid struck the wyrm with wrath, right on the horn.
He did not wish to remain and strike at the wyrm from in front.
He struck him on the side, right on his horned crest.
However, he had to suffer affliction from the wyrm.

He struck the horn unceasingly with his good sword,
yet the heat from the dragon was as if he were made of embers,
like a cartload of coal all aflame.
Then the horn became softened so that it ran from him in rivulets.

He chopped at him right in the middle, cut him in twain
so that he fell from the stone into many pieces.
Then he struck the remainder quickly thereafter.
The maiden ran forth, rushing herself to Sewfrid.

He fell because of the great heat and knew not where he was.
Due to great weakness and exhaustion, he hardly enjoyed himself.
He could not see or hear. No one could have.
His color fled him; coal-black was his mouth.

After he had lain awhile and grown strong again,
he could once again set his heart on the love he sought.
He saw her lying there, so miserably near death.
Sewfrid lamented, "God in heaven, O, my great misfortune."

He lay himself at her side and spoke: "May God have mercy.
Must I bear you home dead?" He lay her on his arm.
Then the dwarf Eugel came and said, at that moment,
"I will give an herb to the maid so that she will quickly recover."

And when the chaste maiden took the herb in her mouth,
she was soon sitting up and came to.
She said, "Very worthy Sewfrid, you have given me your help."
She embraced him lovingly and kissed him on his mouth.

Then Eugel the noble dwarf said to the hero Sewfrid,
"Kuperan, the faithless giant, conquered our mountain,
wherein nearly a thousand dwarves were made subject to him.
We paid tribute for our own land to the disloyal man.

"Now, you have delivered us and made us free.
For this we would gladly serve you, as many as we are,
and will escort you home, you and the fine maid.
I will show you the roads and fords, as far as Worms on the Rhein."

The dwarf led them to his home deep down in the mountain.
He gave him willingly of his food and wine,
the best that one could have or imagine.
Whatever your heart desires—of that was the mountain full.

Sewfrid took leave of the noble king, Eugel,
and from his two brothers, who were likewise kings.
Then the worthy king spoke: "Sewfrid, bold warrior,
our father Nybling has died from sorrow.

"If you had not brought the giant Kuperan to the misery death,
all the dwarves would have had to die in this mountain.
We told you of the key that Kuperan possessed,
which belongs to the stone upon which the maid had lain.

"Now it has come down by your worthy noble hand,
for which we shall ever thank you, noble high-named king.
For this would we accompany you, you and the noble damsel.
So that no misfortune befall you, our thousand shall go with you.

"No," said the hero Sewfrid, "You should remain here."
He set the damsel behind himself and directed the dwarves to return home.
King Eugel the dwarf alone rode with him.
Sewfrid addressed him: "Now tell me brave hero,

"Let me make use of your art, called astronomy.
There upon the dragonstone, early today, you identified
the star and its sign, and how it shall proceed for me,
for me and my beautiful wife, as long as I have her."

Then the dwarf Eugel said, "I will promise you that
you shall have her only eight years. I have seen that.
Then your life will be cruelly taken.
Utterly faultless, you will lose your life.

"Then your beautiful wife will avenge your death
so that many heroes lose their lives
and no heroes remain living anywhere on the earth.
Wherever a hero remains on earth, he must be married."

Sewfrid spoke quickly: "Shortly I will be slain
and will rest well, so I will not ask
by whom I am to be slain." Then Eugel quickly said,
"Yes, and your beautiful wife shall also lie dead because of the war."

"Now turn back home," Sewfrid said to the dwarf.
They parted ways in sadness. Eugel the noble king
returned to the mountain. Now Sewfrid thought about
how he had left the treasure lying there by the stone.

He had two thoughts: the first about Kuperan,
the other about the wyrm. Who left the treasure?
He believed the wyrm had collected it by human cunning:
When he became a man, he took posession of the treasure.

Sewfrid said, "Since I, through hardship, have won the stone,
what I found within belongs by right to me."
He ran and fetched the treasure, he and his beautiful wife.
He loaded up his horse and drove him on ahead.

When he arrived at the Rhein, he thought to himself,
"If I live such a short time, what good shall it do me?
And if all warriors around me will be lost,
then to whom shall this do any good?" Thereupon, he poured it into the Rhein.

He knew not that the heirs were the kings in the mountain.
They had hidden there the treasure of Nybling the old dwarf.
Eugel the dwarf, his son, knew nothing of this matter.
He thought the treasure lay there in the well of the mountain.

Eighth Adventure:
What transpired next with Sewfrid

Now a man received from King Gybich a worthy messenger's bread
because he reported his beautiful daughter would come soon thereafter
and told how she had been redeemed from the impure wyrm.
Gybich quickly read an invitation to noble and common alike.

Everyone rode to meet Sewfrid, the noble warrior.
No emperor in the world was so well honored.
The king sent messengers to every empire and country.
Kings, princes, and lords were all told the tale

so that everyone came there to Worms on the Rhein.
To the worthies' wedding, fifteen princes rode,
who were well received as princes should be.
Soon it was the case that the land was full of lords.

The wedding feast lasted more than fourteen days,
in which they did running and jousting and bohorts.
There were sixteen tournaments in which everyone rode.
Food and garments were given both to horse and man.

Sewfrid gave them good attendants and strengthened the court.
If anyone wore gold, he need not have feared
since, with his great might, Sewfrid kept the order.
"The devil knows," said Gunther, "that one so worthy holds him.

"Before a hero so bold, those now here are weakened,
though they are just as noble in lineage as he.
He bears with him every day the weapons and the ring
by which he holds the heroes in this land subservient."

Then spoke grim Hagen: "He is my sister's husband.
If he wants to rule the country down here on the Rhein,
then he shall observe that he does not oversee it.
Because I would ever be the first and he such a rake."

Then spoke Gyrnot, the warrior: "My sister's husband, Sewfrid—
I would give the best joint of my hand
for our father Gybich to have my courage.
So I say Sewfrid here will at length do no good."

So the three young kings bore hatred for Sewfrid
until they truly silenced him completely
so that Sewfrid lay dead. Beside a cold spring,
grim Hagen pierced him, there in the Odenwald,

between his shoulders, where he was fleshy,
when he cooled himself in the spring with mouth and also with nose.
In a knightly contest, they had raced through the brush.
To Hagen it was fell that he would pierce Sewfrid.

To whomever would hear more of the three brothers of Krimhilt,
I will here advise him, where he may find that:
Read Sewfrid's Golden Age. There you may read the report
of how it went those eight years. Here ends this poem.
